**Tether(USDT)**

The idea proposed by JR Willet was materialized into `mastercoin` which aimed to utilize a new `second layer` on the bitcoin blockchain. Mastercoin would eventually become the technological foundation of the Tether cryptocurrency. Then, in 2014, a few team members from the Mastercoin project established their own startup called `Realcoin` using the same second layer technology, now called `Omni Layer Protocol`. Later that year, realcoin was renamed `Tether`, refinancing its ties to fiat currency.

Each tether is equivalent to one US dollar, essentially making it a digital dollar. Bitfinex, which is a sister company of Tether, claims "every tether is always 100% backed by our reserves, which include traditional currency and cash equivalents, and from time to time may include other assets and receivables from loans made by Tether to third parties, which may include affiliated entities." Every tether is also pegged one to one to the dollar.So 1 USDT is always valued by Tether at 1 USD.

Besides being a stablecoin, it exists on several different blockchains. There's a tether token on the omni bitcoin platform, Ethereum, EOS, and Tron. The difference between the four coins has to do with the properties inherited by the blockchain hosting tether. For instance, for maximum safety and immutability, some investors may prefer the Bitcoin Omni version of tether. Other investors might prefer the ERC20 Tether token, as it can be used in DEFI to earn a passive income. Few investors appear to be interested in keeping their tethers connected to the TRON network.

How does tether work?

Tether's omni version consists of a 3-layer stack: the Bitcoin blockchain, the omni layer protocol, and Tether Limited. The Bitcoin blockchain is the bottom layer that serves as a transactional ledger and runs the consensus algorithm. The second layer, omni, is used to create and destroy digital Tether coins as well as track and report the tokens in circulation. This layer also enables users to send and store these tokens securely and anonymously. The third layer, Tether Limited, is the business entity that manages fiat deposits and withdrawals from the Tether reserve, along with the management of Tether's web wallet and compliance logistics.

When a user deposits fiat currency into Tether Limited's reserve, by selling fiat to buy USDT, the business generates and issues the corresponding amount of digital dollar tokens to the user that can be sent, stored, or exchanged. If a user deposits $100 USD, they will receive 100 tether tokens. These tether coins are destroyed and removed from circulation when the user redeems the tokens for fiat currency. Bitcoin's secure blockchain and its network effect helped Tether gain popularity over other stablecoins operating on different blockchains.

In 2019, the ERC-20 version surpassed the Omni version in number of transactions, and in October of the same year, it surpassed it in market cap. Today, the ERC-20 version is the indisputable leader in the market cap between the two. Critics claim the high volume of USDT transactions saturates the Ethereum network and increases transaction fees. In fact, when most exchanges made the switch from Omni to ERC20, the oversaturation of the trades was 17 times higher than it was during the Ethereum gridlock of November 2017.

USDT has two more versions, built on top of two more blockchains that are smart-contract oriented: TRON, EOS, and the Algorand network.

# MakerDAO

**DAI and MakerDAO**

The idea of DAI is kind of an incentive structure. Maker Foundation created the Maker DAO which is a decentralized organization. They try to create the algorithm (incentive structure) to make the users undertake certain behaviour and all those behaviours would create the token DAI that would be worth roughly a dollar. Consider how difficult it is to take all of the cryptocurrencies that are trading on centralized and decentralized exchanges, with all of their wild volatility, and try to compress all of that volatility into something worth a dollar.They are going to spit so many that whole DeFi can work using the DAI token that is worth dollar.

So they created the algorithm and gave people the incentive  for people locking the ETH in their `vaults`. Back then they were called `CDPs` and now they're called "vaults." Why would you do that? because DAI is worth roughly a dollar. They can transact on that. If I want to send $100 to someone who's around the world, I don't want to use the banking system because it's going to cost me a lot to send the money. So I might send 100 DAI.

There needs to be some collateralization ratio. Let's say that the ETH is worth $300 and I lock up 1 ETH. In essence there's 150% collateralization ratio. So ETH is the collateral. For 1 ETH worth $300, I get 200 DAI. Why should I lock my ETH instead of selling it for $300? The reason partially is because ETH is going to go up to $500. So I want to hold on to my ETH, but I want to borrow and transact in DAI. I'm borrowing DAI and locking up my ETH. They have done this algorithmically to the point where the interest that I'm going to pay is such that I think ETH is going to go up more in value than the interest I'm going to pay. If I want to unlock that ETH, I need to pay the DAI back plus some interest.


The issue we have to address is volatility. Well the 150% collateralization rate helps with that volatility because if I put in 1 ETH which is worth $300 and I only got 200 DAI back. So even if ETH goes to $275, my  health factor ir still good because they only issued 200 DAI. If the collateralization ratio is 140% and ETH goes down to $280, my position will be liquidated. The ETH was locked in a smartcontract, the vault would essentially take it and burned. My collateral would be taken, and that's how they protected the value of the DAI. The interest rate of the DAI is always changing to give people the incentive to put more into the vault or potentially take out of the vault.

The incentive structure is there to make people drop ETH in the vaults, lock it up, pull DAI out and pay some level of interest. The maker token trades kind of irrespective of this because you have to have the maker token in order to pay the interest. There's enough value in the `MKR` token to pay the interest. If I get liquidated, there's also a liquidity fee which is a fee that I pay for transaction because they have to liquidate my ETH which is no different than getting liquidated in traditional finance loan. So most people would do 200% to 300% collateralization rate because they don't want to get liquidated.

Now they also have `multi-collateral DAI`.They've enabled other cryptocurrencies to be able to use inside the vaults.This is great because we're not 100% beholden to the price of ETH.The price of ETH can go up and down but I can lock up other tokens  and produce DAI.Oracles are being used to define the price of the token.This makes ecosystem stable ideally because at some point all the different cryptocurrencies  will not move in concert together.Sometimes ETH will go up and others will go down.They move in different ways that way I might not have to worry about my collateralization or liquidation.

On Black Thursday, the entire crypto market fell and all the positions were liquidated. The value of DAI kind of went crazy for a while because of all these liquidations and it happened so quickly that the price of ETH just fell by 40%/50% in a matter of hours. But there were some governance changes that were made that got the value of DAI back to around $1.

DAI is roughly pegged to dollar. It's done algorithmatically using incentive to drive certain behaviours to lock up my crypto and borrow DAI. It mint's DAI as I'm borrowing and have to pay it back with interest. It can always be monitoring the supply and demand. If the demand curve has moved a little bit, we need to move the supply curve by changing the interest rate and get more people to actually lock up their crypto and create more DAI or get people to pay the DAI back and we burn it and take their crypto out because the interest rate is such that they don't want to lock their crypto anymore.
