**Uniswap**

Uniswap is a protocol for the decentralized exchange of tokens on the Ethereum blockchain. It's deployed as a set of smart contracts and is completely decentralized, permissionless, and censorship-resistant. It is built on the concept of liquidity pools and AMM. The initial version of Uniswap was written in Vyper. In Uniswap V1, each liquidity pool had to include ETH as one of the currencies. For example, to trade from USDC to DAI, the user would have to trade the USDC for ETH and ETH for DAI, which usually results in higher gas fees and more slippage.

Uniswap launched Version 2 of the contract, offering ERC20-ERC20 liquidity pools. This is also preferable for liquidity providers who do not want to supply ETH and risk impermanent losses. V2 also had a few other features, including on-chain price feeds and flash swaps. All of the V2 smart contracts were written in Solidity. Due to its decentralized and permissionless nature, the first version of the protocol has been actively used alongside V2 for some time, regardless of the Uniswap team's encouragement to liquidity providers to migrate their liquidity to V2.

Sushiswap also came into play, which was aiming to directly compute with Uniswap by forking the project, adding a reward for Uniswap liquidity providers, and eventually stealing Uniswap liquidity onto the Sushiswap platform. This is also called a "Vampire Attack." The Sushiswap yield farming resulted in Uniswap liquidity going from around $300 million to almost $2 billion in a matter of days. Before the migration of Uniswap to Sushiswap started, there was still around $800 million worth of Uniswap liquidity staked on the Sushiswap platform. Although the Sushiswap migration resulted in Uniswap's total liquidity dropping from almost $2 billion to as low as $0.5 billion, the remaining liquidity was still higher than a couple of weeks earlier, which was $300 million before the Sushiswap project even started.

Later, Uniswap announced their Uni token. The most surprising part of the launch was how some of the tokens were retrospectively allocated. Everyone who had used Uniswap even once before the 1st of September was eligible to claim their 400 Uni tokens. The Uni tokens were distributed to around 50,000 Ethereum addresses, making them one of the most widely distributed tokens in the space. On top of that, the liquidity providers of the protocol were also retrospectively rewarded with extra Uni tokens. A total of 1 billion Uni tokens were allocated. 60% go to community members, 21.51% go to team members and future employees with a four-year vesting period, and 0.069% go to advisors with a four-year vesting period. After 4 years, there will be a perpetual inflation rate of 2% inflation per year to ensure continued participation and contribution to Uniswap at the expense of passive Uni holders.

On top of that, Uniswap announced incentives for liquidity pools that will reward liquidity providers with extra Uni tokens. Uni holders can also vote to add more incentivized pools after the initial 30-day governance grace period is over. By launching the token, the Uniswap team wanted to further decentralize the protocol, making it a publicly owned and self-sustaining financial infrastructure, while still continuing to protect its indestructible and autonomous qualities. The token holders will be able to participate in Uniswap governance by voting on different proposals or delegating their votes to a third party.
