# Bancor

Bancor is a DEX similar to Uniswap made up of liquidity pools and AMM. It's the first protocol to be a DEX. The native token of this protocol is BNT, which is the very first ERC20 token. You are depositing your token in the liquidity pool with this BNT token. Two massive advantages of Bancor are single-sided liquidity and extra liquidity farming rewards, which are paid out in BNT tokens, and liquidity protection (impermanent loss insurance). If you're a LINK owner and not interested in any other tokens but want to earn some fees and passive income on your LINK, you can enter the LINK pool on Bancor and just put LINK into that pool. So you don't have to swap 50% of your LINK into any other token, and the BNT token that was minted by the pool will be burned once you withdraw your LINK, and the trading fee earned by the protocol-minted BNT will also be burned.

Let's say you want to trade LINK for ETH through Bancor pools. Well, technically, you'll be making trades from LINK to BNT and from BNT to ETH, which makes BNT one of the most liquid and most traded tokens. All trades are routed through the BNT token, which generates a fee each time a user uses it and for the protocol itself. A secondary benefit of this is that all traders pay a fee for their trades. Since the Bancor protocol minted half of the liquidity for each pool, it means they're entitled to half of the trading fees that were generated, which are used to provide impermanent loss insurance.

Impermanent loss insurance means if I put some liquidity into a pool, prices can go up and down, so I would suffer impermanent loss, but Bancor actually has protected pools that, if you keep your liquidity in these pools for a minimum of 30 days, after that 30 days you start to earn protection, so that no matter what happens to the value of your stake, you'll never actually come out with less than you put in, regardless of what's going on with impermanent loss. After 30 days, you get 30% protection, and then for every additional day, you get an extra 1%. Once I reach 100%, I can keep earning fees regardless of the price fluctuation, and even if the price goes down, I would still get my initial stake.

Liquidity providers pay monthly to protect themselves if something really bad happens. With Bancor, you pay 15% of the trading fees that you earn as a liquidity provider into a pool that protects you and your fellow liquidity providers from impermanent losses. As mentioned, Bancor also uses fees earned on its own BNT supplied to its pool to help fund its insurance payouts, and after covering the cost of insurance, it then burns any excess fees to keep the total supply in check.

BNT is not a governance token on its own. You need to actually stake BNT in Bancor in order to get voting rights to vote in the Bancor DAO. Whenever you stake your BNT tokens, you technically receive vBNT. One could technically say Bancor has a POS governance model. All the voters in the Bancor DAO are both BNT holders and liquidity providers, whereas in a DEX like Uniswap, token holders who vote on the changes don't have to be liquidity providers. This basically means all BNT holders will be voting in a way that is most likely beneficial to all the other liquidity providers, while on the other hand, Uniswap holders will vote in a way that's exclusively beneficial for the Uni token and not necessarily the liquidity providers.
