**Traditional Finance System**

Let's learn how a bank works. Every hardworking person in society provides a service and has savings. Their money in their house is doing nothing. They got their savings from the people for whom they'd provided service. There's some guy who has a good idea for a project for which he or she could make a decent amount of money. But how will he or she persuade others to contribute to the project? He or she could promise to give something in the future once the project finishes, but no one will be willing to work for him or her unless they feel really secure that they're going to get something in return.

We have an interesting problem. There are a bunch of people who provide services and have savings in the form of gold or paper money, and there's another group that has an awesome idea but no capital to start with. So what if the entrepreneur could borrow some savings from another group? The entrepreneur could generate wealth and share it with other groups. However, it is extremely difficult for the group to evaluate an entrepreneur's project idea, especially when the project may necessitate the rescue of thousands of people.Also, it'll be hard for one group to evaluate who has a good project and who has more savings.

Someone saw this opportunity and called a business "Bank." Let's say I have a million dollars in savings, and I've used that to build the structure of a solid, safe, and secure vault. So my "equity" is $1 million. People will be comfortable keeping their money here, and they'll feel safe too. So, instead of keeping your money insecure in your home, why not put it in my vault? If you ever need it, you can come and get it, and on top of that, I'll pay you interest. So everyone puts their savings, which, let's say, is $10 million in deposits, which is a "liability" for me because I owe that to other people. I told people that they could take money at any time, so I need to put some cash aside in case people want their money back.

So let's say 10% of $10 million is $1 million in reserve, and then I've got $9 million left that I can hopefully put to productive use. I loan that money to people who have really good projects or investments, which are "assets," because they own me that amount. I'm borrowing $10 million, keeping $1 million in reserve, and paying out $9 million in loans. A loan could be given to multiple projects.

How am I making money?

I hope to use the loan for irrigation, factory construction, or any other investments that generate more value than they cost to begin with. So I can charge interest, and it should be a cut of the value that's been created. Let's say I'm charging 10% on the loan and assume all my payout loans are on the best project. Also, I'm paying 5% interest on the deposited amount. So how much money do I make?

So I'm making 10% on $9 million, which is $900,000 a year, and I'm paying out 5% of $10 million, which is $500,000. That leaves me with $400,000 left over. Assume I spent another $100,000 on salaries, security, and other expenses. I'm netting $300,000. So in the big picture, I'm putting in $1 million every year and making $300,000 by matching up the savings with good investments, and everyone benefits.
